our earth is a collection of puzzle
pieces that make up the universe and the
vast darkness of space the universe is
lit by stars which could one day become
a supernova and create all the puzzle
pieces that we know today as the
elements all elements were formed and
released into space by exploding stars
for centuries humans have tried to
discover what makes up the world around
them little did they know that all the
pieces they needed were right under
their noses the discovery of these
pieces revolutionized our understanding
of the world and allowed for the
creation of what might be the greatest
gift to science the periodic table so
where are these elements and how do we
find a means to order them well believe
it or not ancient civilizations were
very much aware of many elements around
them but they did not identify them as
the pieces of our universe elements like
gold silver and copper weren't easily
spotted by ancient cultures and were
used for multiple purposes like jewelry
and tools why would these elements spot
it so easily think of the periodic table
as a puzzle the corner pieces are edges
of a puzzle are generally the easiest to
find and place because they stand out
with their smooth edges and clearly
don't interlock with other puzzle pieces
like puzzle pieces elements can be
choosy on who they interact with some
like direct with other elements while
others do not
the elements that do not interact with
other elements are easy to pinpoint
while the ones that like to interact
with others are difficult to find gold
silver and copper are some of the
choosier elements so we could find them
easier so let's fast forward to the late
1600s where henyk brand a German
alchemist was busy working in his
laboratory like many other alchemists of
his time Rand was trying to extract gold
from the human body brand hit upon what
he thought was the most obvious answer
to his problem urine urine his golden
coloration and could perhaps have gold
in it so brand collect as much urine as
he possibly could much of it being his
own then he decided to boil it down in
hopes of obtaining gold so brand boiled
his well urine down until he collected a
pace and heated the pace to a very high
temperature
eventually smoke appeared and the
material burned brightly and violently
Brande had unknowingly isolated
phosphorus from his urine was the first
time anyone had discovered an element we
didn't really understand what he had
done at the time of brand the concept of
element had not been discovered
instead ancient Greek principles of
objects being composed of earth water
air and fire were predominant it wasn't
until the work of antoine lavoisier was
now known as a father chemistry that
science defined one element was
Lavoisier defined an element as a
substance that could not be broken down
by existing chemical means Lavoisier
created a list of the known elements of
his time and try to put the elements in
some sort of order in which they could
be classified such as gases or metals he
was a first one to try to put the puzzle
together this was just the beginning of
a means to organize the known elements
of his time many other chemists then
came along to make the puzzle clearer
one of them John Dalton weighed the
elements and arranged the puzzle by
weight German chemist Wolfgang Dover
Reiner later combined elements to see
how they reacted with one another what
he found was that certain elements
shared similar properties and reactions
for example when pure lithium sodium and
potassium are exposed to water they will
react violently and skid across the
surface of the water with sparks the
scientists then realized that these
similarities are no coincidence elements
belong to families that share similar
properties but the chemists who finally
put the puzzle together was Dmitri
Mendeleev he created cars of each known
element and tried to order them based on
atomic weight and their known properties
the story is that he stayed up three
days and three nights he finally fell
into a deep sleep and he dreamed about a
table to order the elements Mendeleev
was not only able to create the periodic
table but he was able to predict
elements that were not yet discovered
the puzzle the periodic table of the
elements was solved
you